---
title: Training information service specialists in the less favoured regions of the European Union (TRAIN-ISS)
header-includes:
        <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=us-ascii">
        <meta name="keywords" content="information infrastructure, Europe, information services, Information Society, professionals, life long learning, information professionals, Information Market, Less Favoured Regions, LFRs, European Union, education, training, TRAIN-ISS, IMPACT 2, Commission of the European Communities">
        <meta name="description" content="The expanding information infrastructure in Europe will increase the demand for high-quality, easily accessible and usable information services. At the same time, in the Information Society, there will be an increasing demand for professionals with skills, able to improve their potential through life long learning, accessing and using information sources available world-wide. Highly qualified information professionals are a crucial asset in any society to enable it to reap all the benefits and opportunities created by the Information Market. In the Less Favoured Regions (LFRs) of the European Union there is a shortage of education and training opportunities for information professionals to enable them to cope with the rapidly changing environment. It was to address this need for well qualified and trained information professionals that the TRAIN-ISS project was funded under the IMPACT 2 programme of the Commission of the European Communities">
        <meta name="VW96.objecttype" content="Document">
        <meta name="ROBOTS" content="ALL">
        <meta name="DC.Title" content="Training information service specialists in the less favoured regions of the European Union (TRAIN-ISS)">
        <meta name="DC.Creator" content="I. Owens, F. Wood, T.D. Wilson, A.M.R. Correia">
        <meta name="DC.Subject" content="information infrastructure, Europe, information services, Information Society, professionals, life long learning, information professionals, Information Market, Less Favoured Regions, LFRs, European Union, education, training, TRAIN-ISS, IMPACT 2, Commission of the European Communities">
        <meta name="DC.Description" content="The expanding information infrastructure in Europe will increase the demand for high-quality, easily accessible and usable information services. At the same time, in the Information Society, there will be an increasing demand for professionals with skills, able to improve their potential through life long learning, accessing and using information sources available world-wide. Highly qualified information professionals are a crucial asset in any society to enable it to reap all the benefits and opportunities created by the Information Market. In the Less Favoured Regions (LFRs) of the European Union there is a shortage of education and training opportunities for information professionals to enable them to cope with the rapidly changing environment. It was to address this need for well qualified and trained information professionals that the TRAIN-ISS project was funded under the IMPACT 2 programme of the Commission of the European Communities">
        <meta name="DC.Publisher" content="Professor T.D. Wilson">
        <meta name="DC.Coverage.PlaceName" content="Global">
---

#### Information Research, Vol. 1 No. 3, March 1996

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Training information service specialists in the less favoured regions of the European Union (TRAIN-ISS)
=======================================================================================================

#### Ian Owens, Frances Wood, [T.D. Wilson](mailto:t.d.wilson@shef.ac.uk) Department of Information Studies, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK and Ana Maria Ramalho Correia Instituto National de Engenharia e Tecnologia Industrial Lisbon, Portugal

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\

Introduction
------------

The expanding information infrastructure in Europe will increase the
demand for high-quality, easily accessible and usable information
services. At the same time, in the Information Society, there will be an
increasing demand for professionals with skills, able to improve their
potential through life long learning, accessing and using information
sources available world- wide. Highly qualified information
professionals are a crucial asset in any society to enable it to reap
all the benefits and opportunities created by the Information Market. In
the Less Favoured Regions (LFRs) of the European Union there is a
shortage of education and training opportunities for information
professionals to enable them to cope with the rapidly changing
environment. It was to address this need for well qualified and trained
information professionals that the TRAIN-ISS project was funded under
the IMPACT 2 programme of the Commission of the European Communities

.

The principal objective of TRAIN-ISS was to boost the development of the
European information market through the enhancement of skills and
knowledge available within the LFRs of the Community by means of
transfer from the more favoured regions. This was achieved by means of a
nine-month training programme in various aspects of electronic
information, with a focus on database design, development and marketing,
and on new developments in information technology that are likely to
have an impact in the future, in areas such as telecommunications,
multi-media and the Internet. The programme included a one-month
placement with an experienced information provider. The contract for
running the programme was awarded to the Department of Information
Studies, University of Sheffield, UK in collaboration with the Centre
for Technological Information for Industry of INETI in Portugal.

Design of the course
--------------------

The course design developed by the contractors was discussed in a
Workshop held at the European Commission in Luxembourg at which all the
LFR National Focal Points (NFPs, these are now referred to as National
Awareness Partners) and major information providers were represented. As
a result of the Workshop the course underwent further revision and its
final implementation form was agreed with the Commission.

The participants in the programme had to meet the requirements of the
University of Sheffield for entry into a Diploma/Masters programme as
well as satisfying the requirements of the project. The selection
criteria were agreed at the Workshop and were as follows: Essential: a
University degree or equivalent; and a good working knowledge of
English, as demonstrated by successful completion of the British
Council\'s ELTS (English Language Testing Service) test (or its
equivalent) at level 6.0. Desirable: relevant work experience; knowledge
of, or aptitude for, information service provision; keyboard and basic
computing skills, e.g., word processing; and funding in addition to the
subsistence allowance paid from the TRAIN-ISS budget.

The NFPs in the LFRs were responsible for preparing lists of candidates
based on the criteria and interviews. These lists were used by the
contractors to draw up a list of candidates for approval by the
Commission. Eight students from Greece, two from Italy, six from Spain,
seven from Portugal, six from the eastern L?nder of Germany and three
from Eire participated in the programme. The NFPs also administered a
Previous Knowledge Questionnaire developed by the contractors, which was
used in assessing the knowledge gain of the students, when it was
re-administered at the end of the course.

The programme
-------------

The programme consisted of three periods:

1.  The taught Diploma period - two semesters.
2.  The placement period - one month.
3.  Transfer to MSc status - one year to complete.

### The taught Diploma period

Teaching was carried out by lecturers from the Department of Information
Studies, plus a number of visiting lecturers including staff from
INETI/CITI. Emphasis was placed on practical issues through examples and
case studies.

### The curriculum

The diploma covered the following areas.

1.  European Information Policies
    -   Information market and information technologies
    -   Information society and economy
    -   European economic area
2.  Database design and development
    -   Technical aspects
    -   Managerial aspects (marketing information services, costs of
        database creation, cost of running an information service,
        business plans and budgeting for information services, etc. )
3.  User training and documentation
    -   Interpersonal skills
    -   User needs identification
    -   Documenting systems and services

Emphasis was placed on understanding the applications of information
technology through laboratory-based teaching in the Department\'s
networked micro-computer laboratory.

### Student assessment

The course assessment was based on seven pieces of coursework and two
written examinations. In order to satisfy the requirements set out by
the University of Sheffield for the Diploma in Electronic Information
Management, the students were required to achieve an overall final grade
of eight or more on a 16 point marking scale.

### Student support and programme evaluation

Each student was assigned a personal tutor to whom any problems could be
directed. In addition students could contact any member of staff to
discuss a particular problem. For some of the coursework, groups of
students were allocated to staff members who provided guidance. The
students elected two course representatives who attended the meetings of
the Staff Student Committee and the Teaching Committee thus giving an
opportunity to discuss more general issues about the programme.

Programme review meetings were held at the end of each semester and the
students were asked to complete evaluation questionnaires. The majority
of students found the work load in Semester One to be about right. Most
of the material presented was of interest to the students. The majority
of the students found the material presented in the second semester
interesting but they felt they had too much work to do.

### The placement

Twenty companies in six European countries participated in the programme
by taking at least one student on the one-month work experience
placement. The placements were evaluated by the students as very
successful: a number remarked on the confidence it had given them that
they could contribute usefully in an organisation, as well as on the
fact that the skills they had acquired had indeed proved to be useful.
Many of the placement host organisations commented favourably on the
students and two later offered employment to their students. One student
used his placement report to secure employment in Greece and another
established herself as an independent consultant developing World-Wide
Web pages, a task she had done during her placement.

The MSc in Electronic Information Management
--------------------------------------------

Although outside the requirements of the project, it was decided that
the Department of Information Studies would offer the students who
reached a minimum average score of ten the opportunity to work towards a
Masters degree in Electronic Information Management by means of a
small-scale research project resulting in a dissertation. All the
students reached this level and all opted to proceed to the degree.

Conclusions
-----------

The successful implementation of the Diploma/MSc in Electronic
Information Management course at Sheffield has proved the feasibility of
running a European Masters programme. There are also clear indications
of the benefits of such a programme to the European Union and the LFRs
in terms of the information, knowledge and skills transfer which
occurred as the participants returned to their home countries. The
benefits to the participants themselves are also clear: knowledge and
skills gain; increased confidence; a network of contacts in other LFRs
and also in the more favoured regions; and offers of employment for
some. In completing the TRAIN-ISS project the contractors themselves
have learned many lessons of value in the design and implementation of
European and other Masters programmes. In Sheffield, aspects of this
programme will be incorporated into the existing MSc in Information
Management programme which is currently undergoing one of its regular,
and major, periodic reviews.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
